## Chapter 9: Stanchion #4: Data-Driven Reasoning

Most humans are right 30% of the time—maybe 40% if we’re generous. Or, if
you’re a fan of Anchorman and Brian Fontana1, “They’ve done studies, you
know. Sixty percent of the time, it works every time.” With this high degree of
inaccuracy, relying on our mental models, experience, and intuition is risky. In
human behavioral research, it has been found that human decision-making is
strongly biased by unconscious mental processes, often referred to as “System
1”2, which is fast, instinctive, and emotional. It sometimes produces good
outcomes quickly, and sometimes causes us to make irrational choices. Our
rational mind is referred to as “System 2”, and it is slower, more deliberate, and
more logical, but it rarely intervenes. Fear of loss influences human decisions
more than expectation of gains. This bias affects people’s choices and decisions
in risky situations, like whether to buy insurance, accept lawsuit settlements,
gamble, or invest in projects and initiatives.
    Creating accessible, transparent, real-time data to generate insights and
make decisions can increase your decision success rate. You can’t improve if you
don’t have a benchmark to improve against. You can’t tell which teams are
working well and which teams are struggling based on vibes or intuition. Don’t
get us wrong. Opinions are great, and even though early forms of Artificial
Intelligence are already becoming part of our workflow and decision-making,
insights are still generated by people.
    However, everyone has their own opinions, shaped by their own mental
models. Upping the challenge, comparing and contrasting data collected from
teams with different ways of working, is no simple task, and maintaining
visibility over teams (both as a measure of performance but also to ensure
teams are getting what they need when they need it) is a key function of good
governance.
    Most work that we are focused on when we consider Agile Governance is
knowledge work, and knowledge work is generally hidden work. Global
Transformation Lead, Mirco Hering, has a saying he likes to use whenever the
topic of knowledge work comes up: “It’s not a factory anymore!”3 We can’t
walk down to the shop floor, peer across the supply lines and conveyor belts,
gather inputs and watch a project move closer to “Done”. We can still go to
the gemba, but what we want to see is the progress of the creation of value. We
talked about this in Chapter 7, Sensible Transparency—an output of
Transparency is data.
    Some choose to measure projects against that classic workhorse, the Iron
Triangle, which balances time, cost, and scope (or sometimes swaps scope for
quality). Some organizations have added other key elements and created the
concept of success sliders: adding quality and stakeholders amongst other key
measures of progress. Others prefer more personal measures: customer
satisfaction or team engagement. But are these measures actually helping us to
gather the necessary and timely information needed to make directionally
guiding decisions? Are they helping us take the next best action in a fast-paced
world, where we don’t have the luxury of waiting for project post
implementation reviews (PIRs) that can help shape the next right decisions?
    It’s more common to see these sorts of measures in place when we have a
governance model that relies on intermittent (monthly, quarterly, or even
longer) status reporting, where large gaps between reports allow for a gentle
massaging of data to produce whatever narrative is needed at the time. A need
for more resources can be countered with reports of cost blowouts. If teams
need more time, management can point to schedules being pushed. And so on,
and so on. We can generally find a statistic or data point to support most
decisions. What we often see in this sort of situation is “watermelon
reporting”, where everything is purportedly green until you carve it open and
find the core is nothing but red.
    On that note, there’s a good argument to be made that every project should
start red and stay red until it’s completed its first real increment and is
delivered to users4. Every new project or program is an assumption. It’s an
informed, educated bet, but it’s still a bet. Full of risk assumptions and
untested ideas. So how can we, after time spent drawing diagrams and crafting
PowerPoint slides, think it’s green when nothing has been delivered yet?
Referring back to our old friend, General Von Moltke, even he knew in 1809
that, “No plan of operations reaches with any certainty beyond the first
encounter with the enemy’s main force.” As soon as you start the work, the
work changes.
   As teams become increasingly agile, our measures must become more agile
to match. Instead of measuring total cost, time, or scope, we can look to
predictability, delivery, and improvement. We can map out our system of work
and the states it goes through to get to Done. It’s useful to systemize this
process by adopting tools that allow us to trace our work and manage cross
team collaboration and dependencies. This means we can measure lead time,
cycle time, flow, flow efficiency, and many other important guiding measures.
Combined, these measures help us to understand our performance and how we
might intervene to uplift that performance. We’re personally fans of the
DORA metrics from the DevOps Research and Assessment Team5. However,
you need to find the metrics that best work for the governance model you’re
trying to build.
   To paraphrase Watts S. Humphrey, if every company is a technology
company, then the best predictors of organizational success are the ability to
meet and exceed the following measures:

            Deployment Frequency: How often an organization successfully
       releases to production;
           Lead Time for Changes: The amount of time it takes a “commit” to
       get into production;
            Change Failure Rate: The percentage of deployments causing a
       failure in production;
            Time to Restore Service: How long it takes an organization to
       recover from a failure in production.

   If you’re looking for a starting point to understand how to gather this data
and apply it properly, we recommend The Phoenix Project (Kim, Spafford &
Behr, 2013) or Accelerate (Kim, Humble & Forsgren, 2018).
   In fact, there are layers upon layers of metrics we may want to use. They can
be related to Enterprise Strategy: things that are baked into the Annual
Operating Plans and objectives and are often tied to Management Bonuses
(meaning they get the most attention). They can exist on the System Change
level, and inform us as to how we’re progressing towards the investment in the
delivery of change initiatives; i.e., programs, projects, and things that drive the
outcomes in the Enterprise strategy. They can be like the DORA metrics
above, which (despite the fact that they can be aggregated into an
organizational view) come from the teams and their performance. In fact, these
metrics (if created and managed centrally) enable us to drill into team-level
performance as well, thus giving us the data we need for making those
directionally guided next-best decisions.
    These sorts of measures also help us compare agile vs non-agile teams,
tracking their performance side by side when they’re working together on
common outcomes. Note: when we say “non-agile”, we understand that, in a
modern organization, all teams must at least exhibit the principles of agility. It’s
not a binary decision, even though you often see the choice appear as agile or
waterfall delivery. The ways of working can differ between teams to such a
degree that some appear or operate in a manner that’s markedly more agile
than others. This creates difficulty when it comes to aligning their growth and
progression against broader organizational outcomes. Every project needs an
element of agility, even if you have long-lived sequential base plans, whether
the solution space is known and repeatable, to interact with other work going
on in the broader ecosystem. No team is an island.
    This need to clearly trace work with data and make that next directionally
guiding decision across multiple ways of working is especially critical when we
no longer have neatly defined stage gates or end dates to drive reporting. We
need dynamic measures, adaptive measures, intelligent measures. We need data
that’s as clever as our teams.
    We also need data that’s already in a form, or as close to it as possible, that
helps us form insights and make rapid decisions. To put it simply, if the data
you’re collecting takes so long to interpret that the opportunity to make a
powerful decision is lost, then the data degrades in its efficacy. The best
decisions are always timely. Hence the push to move away from 100-page
status reports and instead take people to the gemba—the actual place of work.
    In a physical space, going to the gemba would imply a walk through the
manufacturing floor, or a boots-on-the-ground consultation with engineers in
their place of work. In remote work or knowledge work, this might instead
mean going directly to the workflow management system or information
radiator/kanban board and directly engaging with the team doing the work
against the way they visualize and trace their work—their Information
Radiator, to borrow from Dr. Alistair Cockburn. Whatever it takes to get the
data directly from the source! This not only increases the pace of decision-
making but also decreases the lead time for gathering the right data. Not to
mention the wasted time we so often see thanks to the demand for data
presented in crisp, perfect PowerPoint decks. No offense to our design teams,
but there’s immense value in ditching the polished status reports in favor of
raw progress information.
    However, what do we do once we have this data? How do we use it to drive
our decision-making? There are four key elements that can help you carve this
flood of data into useful, applicable information that aids in making fast,
critical decisions.
Digital Tools are Essential
Even before COVID-19 forced most modern workplaces into a new remote-
work paradigm, the technology sector had been in a state of transition towards
digital workflow management systems being the norm. They’re the critical
enablers of shared knowledge in the 21st century workplace, which is crucial
for teams of teams developing complex and complicated systems. Being
Australian, one of our homegrown technology success stories was built on the
back of this transition and led the global evolution. We speak, of course, of
Atlassian6, Jira7, and the supporting applications that have evolved around it.
It’s all been in the service of uplifting the way we deliver work—they are
essentially selling pickaxes to miners, often a better path to success than doing
the mining yourself.
    We’re sure you’re already aware that any time you have two or more people
working on a single outcome, they need ways to collaborate and share their
work and progress. The larger the team or the wider the spread, the more
critical that workflow stack becomes. Reliability, planning, predictability,
alignment, traceability of progress… all of this collapses without our modern
suites of digital tools, which help us visualize the unseen and support our new,
digital, remote work models.
    If you’re not already trading in your real-world, physical tools for digital,
you’re a long way behind the curve. There will always be a place for the
physical—especially when you have people coming together in the same place
to work and collaborate—but the sustained move to remote and hybrid
working demands that we think digital first. Emerging data8 shows that the
creative and knowledge-type workforce is settling into an approximately 2:3
split between remote and in-person work. In other words, up to 40% of your
team might not be working physically together at any time. Therefore,
everything must be digitized first.
Data Trumps Opinion
Now that we have the data and the digital tools to share it, what do we do with
it?
    We need to make it visible. We need to make it clear. And we need to use it
in ways that replaces (or at the very least, augments) opinion-based decision-
making.
    In other words, we need to dump monthly PowerPoints showing our group
progress against the outcome, or the extent of the backlog. Everyone has access
to that data already. We can see the work in progress, what’s been delivered,
our lead times, our flow, our predictability metrics. So, let’s have useful
discussions about what to do with that data and how it might affect the
decisions we make day-to-day, moment-to-moment.
    As humans, we rely on pre-existing mental models to make decisions.
When we need to quickly assess a problem and make a call, we draw upon a
variety of elements: our past history and learning, who we trust, our perception
of the domain of the problem, the sound bite we heard or overheard at the
water cooler, the comment from a peer at the coffee shop that we just can’t
shake, our own heuristics and patterns, our learned behaviors, and so on. Even
our own status and ego come into play when determining how we view, shape,
and decide how to use the gathered information. No two people view a
problem in the same way—everything is shaped by our individual perspectives
and histories.
    What data from the source does is break through the lens of our personal
bias and provide a common starting point from which to make the next
decision. It might not guarantee two or more people come to the same
conclusion or make the same decision, but it does mean that everyone is
standing at the same starting line.
Improve Constantly and Forever… Visibly
We’re fans of W. Edwards Deming and his fourteen points model of Total
Quality Management9. As much as things change, some tend to stay the same,
and we’ve found that many of Deming’s quotes, and much of his work, to be
timeless. Of the fourteen points, which aim to improve a company’s quality
and productivity, it’s number five that’s most relevant to this section: “Improve
constantly and forever the system of production and service, to improve
quality and productivity, and thus constantly decrease costs.”
   However, you can’t do any of this without data. Deming knew this as well:
“In God we trust, all others bring data.”
   No complaints here! The systems of work that many modern organizations
have adopted, plus the accompanying digital tool sets, provide us with an
incredible amount of data on the performance of teams and the delivery of
creative work. Work that, in the past, remained buried within the monthly
PowerPoint deck and the Work Breakdown Sheet (WBS). Hard data means we
can have conversations and make decisions from a position of truth, which in
turn allows us to build trust—in our leaders making the right decisions, in our
team members doing the right work at the right time, and in our customers
having the necessary information to give us accurate feedback on the products
we’re building for them.
   Note that we’ve already discussed how total transparency can be a double-
edged sword. However, we’ll say it again: everyone knowing everything all of
the time can be overwhelming and may even stifle innovation. Plus, we’ve
found that the acquisition costs of this knowledge and information likely far
exceed the benefits for decision-making. If we want people to constantly
improve and develop more accurate forecasts, we need to make sure they have
transparency into everything they need without drowning them in irrelevant
data. The cost of extracting and visualizing data in both time and money terms
must not exceed the value that it creates for the decision maker. Part of putting
it into practice is you must budget for design, implementation, and
maintenance of digital decision support environments.
Directional Decisions Informed by Instrumentation
As discussed above, we now have the tools, which collect relevant data, to
support a constant improvement model. So, what now?
We use that data to guide decisions, of course.
    Speed of execution is one of the critical factors in effective agility, and speed
is governed almost entirely by the flow of information. Without the right data
at the right time and in the right format to make those directionally guiding
decisions, leaders find it challenging to let go of micro decision-making and
control. This is compounded in organizations lacking a strong delegation
culture. In an environment such as this, we see long lead times for decisions,
thus increasing delays across the system of work. This directly impacts our level
of agility, as well as our responsiveness to change, or when new information is
surfaced.
    We previously referred to the Westrum model of Organizational Culture,
defined by Ron Westrum10. Westrum’s theory proposes that organizations with
better information flow tend to operate more effectively and exhibit higher
quality decision-making. His model, also known as the Generative model,
focuses on the goal and the outcome, i.e., the core purpose of the organization.
Data informed by the instrumentation we have available in the modern
workforce gives us the ability to implement this model, or models like it.
    The more open, accessible, real-time, and accurate our data, the better our
decisions. Just as we keep one eye on our instrumentation when driving a car
—using our speedometer and fuel gauge to track progress, and our
temperature gauge and engine lights to keep aware of potential faults—so
should we keep one eye on our team and department data when working on
projects.
    The problem we sometimes encounter is that, even when teams have access
to all the data they need, they often don’t use it for planning. Intuition and
personal experience can trump the facts, and this leads to teams getting it
wrong. Deming was right and still is—data trumps opinion. As humans, we
tend to trust our instincts ahead of the data and make decisions based on what
we perceive to be true. However, as we know, everyone’s truth is different.
There’s a view used in Organizational and Relationship Systems Coaching11
(ORSC™) that “everyone is right… but only partially”. What data does is align
on facts and bring people’s different truths closer together. It also breaks some
of the mythology we uncover when decisions are based on our own mental
models instead of on data. It can be challenging as a human to look at the hard
data and find that your opinion was wrong, and it takes a high degree of self-
awareness to accept a conflicting idea, investigate it, and maybe change one’s
opinion. Data is the key enabler to help us make better, more directionally
aligned calls.
    What the data also allows us to do is increase the likelihood that our
decisions are going to be more accurate. We reduce the decision-making batch
size by making those calls more frequently, by gaining faster feedback, and thus
lower our risk profiles. This helps us make smaller, directionally aligned
decisions more often.
    This, of course, doesn’t apply to every problem domain. In a complex
adaptive system, which is where we work, data is often either unavailable or
just not useful. The Cynefin domain thinking implies that we don’t even know
the problem yet, so we can hardly start applying historical information to make
informed decisions. Instead, we need lots of sensors and probes to generate
information quickly. These allow us to make the next best decision. Modern
instrumentation allows us to do this better—if we apply it effectively.
    The philosophy of Deming is over forty years old, but we believe it still
holds true today. Technology has changed, economics has changed, but these
fundamental ways of thinking are rock-solid. What’s frustrating is that, as a
collective industry, we’ve had four decades to internalize this knowledge,
however, we are only now really recognizing and adapting our ways of thinking
and working. As Steve Denning says, we’re now in the age of agile and agile is a
management revolution12.
    No data, no agility.
    We’re rapidly approaching a point where that adaptation will no longer be
optional (if we haven’t passed that point already). The last decade has seen an
explosion in the variety, availability, and use of digital tools, giving us access to
data, information, and insights we never had before. This means that the
ability to get system instrumentation from your teams and use it for decision-
making is no longer a nice bonus. It’s baseline, entry-level thinking. Agile 101.
A core foundation that allows you to build real agility at scale. Only once you
have that baseline can you build the fast-paced data delivery required for
persistent, dynamic teams.
    Above all, remember this fundamental principle: “To make Data-Driven
Reasoning, you need the right data. To have the right data that is useful, you
need to measure the right things.”

1 Dreamworks Pictures, Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy, 2004,
Brian Fontana https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pjvQFtlNQ-M
2 Thinking, Fast and Slow: Kahneman, Daniel (n.d.).
3 Mirco Hering Blog Site; Not a Factory Anymore:
https://notafactoryanymore.com
4 Gadzinski, Phil. Projects and the fear of RED. [online] Available at:
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/projects-fear-red-phillip-gadzinski/
[Accessed 28 Jul. 2023].
5 Google Cloud Blog. (n.d.). Using the Four Keys to measure your DevOps
performance. [online] Available at:
https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/devops-sre/using-the-four-keys-to-
measure-your-devops-performance
6 An Australian software company that develops products for software
developers, project managers and other software development teams. For
more information see https://www.atlassian.com
7 A proprietary bug tracking and agile project management developed by
Atlassian.
8 Barrero, J., Bloom, N. and Davis, S. (2023). The Evolution of Working from
Home. [online] Available at: https://wfhresearch.com/wp-
content/uploads/2023/07/SIEPR1.pdf
9 Dr Edwards Deming: The New Economics - 14 Points for Management;
Out of The Crisis (MIT Press) (pp. 23-24)
https://deming.org/explore/fourteen-points
10 Westrum, R (1988) A Typology of Organizational Cultures.
11 For more information, see CRR Global: https://crrglobal.com/about/orsc/
12 Denning, S. (2018). The age of agile - how smart companies are
transforming the way work gets done. New York, Ny Amacon American
Management Association.


---